>>>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC] And
I think many people today
don't know what to
believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>I felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>NARRATOR: And now, the host of
the nationally syndicated Coast
to Coast AM and Gaiam TV
bring you Beyond Belief
with George Noory.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to Beyond Belief.
Like the movie "Armageddon,"
President Obama
has a plan, a $100 million
plan to send astronauts
to an asteroid, capture it,
tow it back around the moon.
What does that all mean?
And will planet Earth
get hit by an asteroid?
Once again, we turn to
planetary expert, Dan Durda,
on Beyond Belief.
Dan, welcome to the show.
[APPLAUSE]
>>NOORY: How are you?
>>DAN DURDA: Hi, George.
Great to see ya.
>>NOORY: Have a seat.
>>DURDA: Great, thanks.
>>NOORY: Always good to
see you in the flesh.
>>DURDA: Yeah, absolutely.
>>NOORY: What's this plan
of sending astronauts
to an asteroid, capturing it,
and towing it around the moon?
What's that for?
>>DURDA: Well,
it's about actually
moving the human presence off
this planet out of low Earth
orbit and into near Earth space.
And we've got to start
somewhere and learn
to practice those techniques.
And we might as well start
with something that sometimes
directly affects us here on
Earth, which is getting out
there, grabbing a little
asteroid, the kinds that
occasionally hit us, the
kinds that, in the future,
will be great sources
for mineral resources
out there in space, and
learning to interact with it,
learning to grab them,
learning to move them around.
And demonstrate that
we humans have finally
gotten the capability to
alter our solar system.
Think about that.
We are at a point in our
species where we can literally
change the shape of
the solar system.
>>NOORY: How far out
does this asteroid
have to be before
they land on it?
>>DURDA: Well we
haven't actually
found the asteroid yet.
The way this mission
would work is,
once as it progresses
further, we will actually
go out and target,
complete the search
for these little small
near-Earth asteroids
and find the most appropriate
target at the time
that we actually
fly the mission.
And then go out and grab
that one and pull it in.
>>NOORY: Now, how you are
you going to pull it in?
What do you do?
You put a lasso around it?
>>DURDA: Almost literally,
that's the case.
And it's not a lasso in
this particular case.
It's a big net, in a sense.
The spacecraft,
which really looks
like many other sort of
communications satellites
from the way it looks--
except this one has
a big, deployable bag, literally
a big, deployable bag--
that would go out and
ensnare the asteroid,
and net it down, close it down.
And then it becomes
attached to the spacecraft,
a part of the spacecraft
at that point,
and then literally is
maneuvered back to Earth.
>>NOORY: How fast is an asteroid
speeding through the universe
right now?
>>DURDA: Very much, the ones
in the near Earth environment,
the ones near us in space, are
moving around the sun in space
pretty much the same
way the Earth is.
We're moving at
about 30 kilometers
every second around the sun.
>>NOORY: That's pretty fast.
>>DURDA: That's pretty fast.
Let's see, I have to do
the math very quickly
in my head, 6, 12--
>>NOORY: That's why I just
said it's pretty fast.
>>DURDA: It's pretty
fast, exactly.
But all the asteroids
around us are
moving at those kinds of speeds.
Now like a bunch of cars
in traffic on the highway,
you're all generally
moving the same speed,
but some are changing
lanes, some are passing.
So the speeds relative to us
are a lot lower than that,
but still pretty high compared
to things we're used to.
>>NOORY: All right.
So if you tow it
in, and then you
put it around the orbit of
the moon, how do you do that?
>>DURDA: The way they maneuver
other spacecraft in space.
They're very slow,
gentle maneuvers.
It's not like in the movies
where things happen very fast.
It'll take days,
days of maneuvers,
probably even weeks,
quite frankly,
but days of
spacecraft operations.
You'll use the thrusters
on the spacecraft itself.
This is not going to be
a big asteroid, right?
The one we go after
to net like this
will probably be not much bigger
than this stage, quite frankly.
>>NOORY: That's small.
>>DURDA: It'll be a
rock in space, right?
>>NOORY: OK.
>>DURDA: I mean, technically
it's an asteroid,
but it's going to be small.
>>NOORY: OK.
I was thinking something huge.
It's not going to be that--
>>DURDA: It's not
going to Mount Everest.
No, it's going to be
the size of the stage,
or the size of half this studio.
So something small,
but that's how you get
started, quite frankly.
But, you know, I'll remind you
that an object of that size
can do a lot of
damage plummeting
through the atmosphere.
>>NOORY: Oh, sure.
>>DURDA: Right?
So if that's the kind
of object that you
want to learn to maneuver
and work around with,
it's a great place to start.
>>NOORY: Well, Dan,
we saw what happened
when the meteor exploded over
Siberia several months ago.
>>DURDA: Yeah.
>>NOORY: You know,
1,000 people injured.
Had that blown up a little
closer to the atmosphere,
that could have really
sustained some damage.
>>DURDA: We were lucky.
So this was back in February,
it was about 55 feet across.
This was pretty big.
This is, in fact,
the biggest thing
we've ever seen
historically since we've
been looking for objects
coming near the Earth,
actually plummet
through the atmosphere.
It was a big event.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>DURDA: But we were lucky.
So this thing plummeted
in through the atmosphere
at a very grazing angle.
Actually we ran into it
as it was approaching us
from inside the
orbit of the Earth.
We ran into it, but it
entered our atmosphere
at a very grazing angle.
And that is why we were lucky.
There was a lot of
opportunity for the atmosphere
to break this
object, and I mean,
in both uses of the words.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>DURDA: --to slow it
down and literally,
to break it into bits.
Had this thing come at a more
plunging angle straight down,
the damage in Chelyabinsk
there in Russia--
>>NOORY: Would've been huge.
>>DURDA: --would've
been a lot worse.
>>NOORY: Huge.
>>DURDA: People could
have been killed.
>>NOORY: You know,
we've talked on Coast
to Coast for years, you and
I, about the possibility
of getting hit by an asteroid.
What could happen?
And what is scary, not the
ones that we know about,
it's the ones we
don't know about.
>>DURDA: Like Chelyabinsk.
>>NOORY: That's right.
This meteor that became a
meteorite because once it hits,
that's what it's called.
We didn't know about it, did we?
>>DURDA: No, we didn't.
It was one of these cases
we've talked about for years
that, you know,
it's not the ones
I know about that worry me.
It's the ones we don't.
And it literally
came out of the blue
just like the event in 1908
also in Russia in Siberia.
>>NOORY: Tunguska.
>>DURDA: The
Tunguska event-- that
was another one of these
very early morning objects
that came in from
out of the sun--
from the direction of the
sun, not literally from out
of the sun, and
caught us unaware.
And that was the case here.
It was a relatively
small object that
evaded our detection
from telescopes.
These small things--
asteroids are dark.
They're black effectively
from most things we know.
They're like an
asphalt parking lot.
And you put a small one of
these things far out in space,
they're very hard to see.
And this object, far
enough out coupled
with the fact that it came
from the direction of the sun,
it was in the daylight
sky for the weeks
preceding the actual event.
We didn't have a
chance of seeing it.
>>NOORY: And there
seemed to have
been a lot of meteor showers
or sightings weeks after that.
Is it like they came in a swarm?
>>DURDA: I think it's the
reports that come in the swarm.
It's more like the
shark attack summer
that we had a couple
years ago, right,
where it gets a lot
of media attention.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>DURDA: And so that
builds on itself.
We are hit by objects
every single day.
I mean, things do
come in swarms.
We have meteor showers, right,
because the Earth will actually
pass through the swarm of debris
left in the trail of comets.
And so for a period
of several days
before and after that passage,
we will get a swarm of things.
And it's possible certainly
for near-Earth asteroids
to have those kinds of
fragments near them.
And so conceptually
it's possible to have
a swarm like that.
In this case, I will chalk
that up to just media
attention probably.
>>NOORY: Nothing prettier,
hot summer night,
watching meteors
darting across the sky.
>>DURDA: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: How big are they?
They're not that bid, are they?
>>DURDA: No, the ones you're
seeing when you're laying out
on that summer night looking
at the perceived meteors,
for instance, you're
watching grains of sand
burn up in the atmosphere.
>>NOORY: That small?
>>DURDA: That small.
Most of that light, most of
the energy that you're seeing
is from the shock wave
in the atmosphere.
As that little grain of sand
is coming through the air at,
what, 40,000 or
50,000 miles an hour,
right, it's creating a
little mini sonic boom just
like a supersonic
aircraft, except this
is a hypersonic
aircraft in this case.
And that literally shock
heats the atmosphere ahead
of that little grain of sand.
It's like it's
heating the atmosphere
to the point of incandescence
like a candle flame.
That's the light that you see.
And that little grain of sand
will create that glowing cloud
of plasma around it
that is literally
visible for hundreds of miles.
>>NOORY: If it were
a little bigger,
would it be a bigger
visual for us?
>>DURDA: Absolutely.
And when you get to
something the size
of this desk or the
Chelyabinsk object,
in that particular case, it
can be blindingly bright.
The Chelyabinsk meteor
back in February
was as-- it was
literally, literally
brighter than the sun.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
That was daytime.
>>DURDA: It was
right at sunrise.
And for just a little bit,
there were two suns in the sky,
right, because it was literally
brighter than the sun.
There were some reports--
a few of the eyewitnesses
actually reported feeling
the heat on their face
from the radiant energy.
Just like you turn your head up
to the sun on a hot summer day,
you can feel the heat on you.
They felt the heat
from the meteor.
>>NOORY: Did they
hear an explosion?
>>DURDA: They heard
several chains of booms,
literally like sonic booms.
About two minutes after
the visual display was over
because this happened pretty
high up in the atmosphere,
over 20 miles up, it took
that long for the sounds
to propagate.
And there were many
booms that were heard.
You're effectively
hearing the sonic booms
from the main fragment
and its pieces traveling
through the atmosphere.
>>NOORY: Can you feel the
concussion of the sound?
>>DURDA: If it's big enough.
In fact, in the
case of Chelyabinsk,
you can tell how much you
could have felt that concussion
by the windows
that were blown out
and literally brick walls,
cinder block walls that
were blown in.
I saw video of garage
doors that were blown off
the rails indoors, right?
So people were blown
off their feet.
Again, I saw videos of
people standing inside,
the windows shattering
at them as they
were blown to the floor
from that asteroid.
>>NOORY: So if it
were closer, it
could have really
killed some people.
>>DURDA: That was small object.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>DURDA: That was
a small object.
>>NOORY: Why can't we
detect 'em beyond that
with all this kind of
technology that we have?
And how long have we had
the near Earth tracking
system going on?
>>DURDA: Yeah, for
about a decade.
You may remember back in
1994 Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9--
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>DURDA: --broke
up near Jupiter,
and the fragments rained
into the atmosphere.
>>NOORY: Right into Jupiter.
>>DURDA: That was
a real wake up call
for a lot of people,
especially Congress
who finally took note that
these scars, these impact
scars on the
atmosphere of Jupiter
were as big as the planet Earth.
Well, you know, what
if those had hit us.
So that was a wake up
call that things really
do happen in the solar
system like this.
>>NOORY: How many
times, Daniel, have we
been hit over the course of
the existence of this planet?
What do you think?
>>DURDA: Look up in the sky.
Look at the cratered,
scarred surface of the moon.
>>NOORY: It's peppered.
>>DURDA: It's
peppered, absolutely
bombarded with not just little
craters, I mean, huge impact
basins, right, covering
half the face of the moon.
For every one of those
you see on the moon,
you have to remember the Earth
is a bigger target in space,
a bigger gravitational
attractor of passing objects.
For every one you
see on the moon,
we were hit 20, 30, 40 times.
>>NOORY: In that time
period, I always thought
that the moon looked so
impacted as it was forming.
And that these asteroids
were everywhere,
or does that just
show that you can
get hit over billions of years?
>>DURDA: Little bit of both.
A lot of the biggest scars
that we see on the moon
were formed shortly
after its formation.
In the several hundred million
years after the Earth formed,
the moon formed.
We were hit the same way--
>>NOORY: And these asteroids
must have been everywhere.
>>DURDA: They were everywhere.
And what was happening is
the accretionary epoch,
the planet-forming
epoch was tailing off.
And so we were sweeping
up all that debris
and cleaning up the
solar system if you will.
We were big cosmic
vacuum cleaners.
But, of course, there's
still material out there.
Asteroids are still
colliding to this day
in the main asteroid belt
between Mars and Jupiter.
That debris still finds its
way to the inner solar system
even today, obviously.
And we are living
now in an epoch
of kind of a slow, continuous
sweep up phase ever since.
>>NOORY: Well, we take
questions, too, from you
here on Beyond Belief
with Dan Durda.
Who's got a question for Dan?
Just raise your hand.
Yes, sir?
Right here.
>>AUDIENCE: I had a question,
like on the meteorite that
exploded over
Russia, what causes
them to explode like that?
I mean, it wasn't an impact.
>>DURDA: Right.
Right.
Well, in a way,
it was an impact.
It was an impact with
the atmosphere, right?
When these objects come
barreling into the-- you're
going from the vacuum of
space into the dense lower
atmosphere in a
matter of seconds.
And from our perspective, this
air is not that big a problem,
but when you're coming
from the vacuum of space
at those speeds, it's
like doing a belly flop
from a very high
diving board, right?
You smack into that water,
and it makes quite an impact
on you.
So the dynamic
pressure of that entry
is what actually
literally presses,
squeezes on the meteoroid over
the course of just two or three
seconds, going from nothing
to incredible forces.
And that will crack
and split the object.
As that happens, each
fragment that now comes off
is all of a sudden
feeling its own forces
on it, which cracks
and splits that object.
And there's a kind
of a chain reaction
of cracking and
breaking that goes on
within literally a
matter of split seconds.
And that's what we effectively
see as an explosion.
All that energy is now
coupled into the atmosphere
in just a couple seconds.
And from our perspective,
that's a big boom and explosion.
The shock wave will actually
couple into the atmosphere
and propagate out.
And that's the big boom that
happened with the Chelyabinsk
event.
>>NOORY: If these asteroids
have a different complexity,
if some are more rock
than iron, or vice versa,
does that have anything to do
with what happens to them when
they come into the atmosphere?
>>DURDA: Absolutely.
It makes a huge difference.
In the case of the
Chelyabinsk object, as we saw,
it broke up mostly in
the atmosphere like 20--
>>NOORY: It disintegrated.
>>DURDA: --miles up.
Yeah.
Chunks fell on the ground,
but small pieces like that.
An object about the same
size, maybe twice as big,
but the point is it was
made out of iron in the case
of the Meteor Crater impact
in Arizona 50, 000 years ago.
And there we see an object
not a whole lot larger
made a mile wide crater in
the ground, big difference.
>>NOORY: Huge difference.
How about another
question for Dan Durda?
>>AUDIENCE: With
George's mention
of "Armageddon" in the
beginning of your introduction,
it makes me wonder.
If with early enough warning,
would we possibly, maybe
be able to deflect, or deter, a
comet or some type of meteorite
coming into the atmosphere?
>>DURDA: Absolutely, absolutely.
And that's the
hope, of course, is
that, as we detect
more objects in space--
that was the whole purpose
of the Spaceguard program
that was started after the Comet
Shoemaker-Levy 9 impact was
to actually survey the sky to
know the enemy, so to speak,
to be ready for objects that
might actually impact us
so that we can then actually
have a plan in place
to go out and
prevent that impact.
This is the one natural
disaster that we humans have
in our power to be able to
actually prevent altogether.
So how would you actually go out
and stop an asteroid like that?
It depends on the size.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>DURDA: If Mount Everest
is coming toward us,
I'm sorry to tell you,
there's just nothing
>>NOORY: We're in trouble.
>>DURDA: We're in trouble.
We just don't have
the technology
to deal with
something that large.
>>NOORY: And is that possible?
>>DURDA: Well, it's
certainly possible.
We thankfully, with
the Spaceguard survey,
we have chalked off
most of the objects--
>>NOORY: Those big
ones, like a Apophis.
How big is a Apophis?
>>DURDA: Apophis is actually one
of the slightly smaller ones.
There are many more Apophis'
out there that we haven't yet
discovered.
It's the big dinosaur killers.
We've now found pretty
much all of them.
And so we don't stay up nights
worrying about those too much.
And we couldn't do anything
about something of that scale
anyway, quite frankly.
But an Apophis-scale
object, maybe half a mile
across or a quarter
mile across, something
on that sort of size
scale, if found soon enough
before potential
impact, we could
think about actually
going out and nudging
that object in some way.
All you have to do is change the
speed of an object typically--
>>NOORY: Just a little bit, huh?
>>DURDA: Yeah, if
it's 10 years out,
20 years out from
impacting us, you just
change its speed by 0.02
miles per hour, right?
That'll be enough
to cause what would
have been an impact in the
future into a near miss.
That's all you have to do.
>>NOORY: Amazing.
>>DURDA: So you want
to go out there,
and you want to change
the speed of that object.
You can run a spacecraft
into the asteroid.
If it's a small enough asteroid,
you just fly a spacecraft--
>>NOORY: Just collide it.
>>DURDA: Just collide it.
We've practiced that.
The deep impact
mission was a mission
to a comet to study how
to make craters on comets.
It wasn't meant to
practice this technique,
but it certainly gave us a lot
of information on how to do it.
So that's one we can do.
We could go out and
tow an asteroid away.
You just take your
spacecraft, you
park it next to the asteroid,
let the gravity of the two
that would normally pull
each other together--
if you keep your spacecraft
always just hovered off
the surface of the asteroid,
that gravity that you normally
would have let
just fall together,
you're now letting
the spacecraft
tow the asteroid along with it.
It doesn't take much.
>>NOORY: Can you blow
it up with a nuke?
>>DURDA: You can do that.
And that's sort of a
favorite Hollywood--
that's the "Armageddon"
approach, right,
the favorite Hollywood approach.
You know, it would
actually work.
For a small enough asteroid,
that would actually work.
It's not the preferred
approach because you still
will have a lot of debris
coming toward the Earth
if it's on an impact course, if
you don't get it early enough.
And frankly, there
are a lot of folks
who just aren't too keen
on the idea of blowing up
nuclear weapons in space.
That's another
deterrent in itself.
But probably the biggest
deterrent, quite frankly,
aside from those sort
of philosophical issues
is just the controlability
of something like that.
The best techniques
are the ones where--
the last thing you want to
do is to move an asteroid off
of a collision course for
today, but have accidentally
moved onto another collision
course for the future.
You want a very controllable
technique, right,
something that's predictable,
something you can monitor.
And a nuclear weapon is
kind of a pretty blunt--
>>NOORY: Well, and you can also
create other particles like
a shot gun--
>>DURDA: Exactly.
>>NOORY: And all of a sudden
it scatters everywhere.
>>DURDA: Exactly.
And here's the other problem
with something like that.
If you don't catch it
early enough, if this
is your last minute, sort of
your last desperate attempt
to prevent the impact, most of
the worst things with impacts
are the effects
in the atmosphere.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>DURDA: A typical
rocky asteroid
is made out of-- we know
what that material is like.
We have meteorites on the Earth.
We can study them pretty easily.
We know that in
those objects which
have their natural cosmic
abundance of elements
like chlorine, and
bromine, and sulfur,
there is enough ozone
destroying chlorine and bromine
in a fairly large asteroid
to destroy the ozone layer.
Now it doesn't matter if that
object comes in one impact.
It doesn't matter
if that object comes
in in one piece or
lots of little pieces.
All that chlorine
and bromine is still
delivered into the atmosphere.
So that's why you don't want
to do something like that.
>>NOORY: Let's take one
more question for Dan Durda.
Who's got one?
Yes?
>>AUDIENCE: Is that a
question about there's
like a planet-killer
asteroid like coming
in like 2026 or
2036, whatever it is?
Is there any new
information on that?
>>DURDA: Yeah.
That's the asteroid Apophis
that George referred to.
It's going to make a very close
approach to us in the year 2029
on April 13th of all
things, Friday the 13th.
>>NOORY: Oh, that's great.
>>DURDA: Figures, right?
It just figures.
We know with absolute
certainty it's
not going to hit us on
that particular approach.
The orbit is tracked
precise enough
with-- we have enough optical
telescopic observations
of the object and
good radar pings
off of the object, which
are a very good way
to nail down where it is in
space and where it's going.
So it won't hit us on that
date, but there was always
this possibility that as it did
approach the Earth-- of course,
Earth's gravity is going
to bend the path of that
asteroid as it passes near us.
And there was always
the possibility
that depending on exactly
how that path was bent,
it could set up another
potential impact
seven years later in 2036.
And that was hanging
in there at the sort
of one in a few hundred,
one in a few thousand
sort of possible odds.
After this last
close approach, we've
been able to refine
the orbit well enough
to know that we're down
into the noise level
now of potential impact
for that particular event.
>>NOORY: Do computers do that?
Is that how we
create this model--
>>DURDA: Yes.
>>NOORY: --by a computer?
>>DURDA: Yes, absolutely.
Through optical and
radar observations,
you track the position
of the object with time.
And that allows you to
then propagate forward
where that object is
going to be in the future,
accounting for the
gravity of the Earth--
>>NOORY: And how
accurate is all that?
>>DURDA: It's
accurate enough to be
able to track these things out
for like centuries to come.
But you get beyond about
maybe 100 or 200 years
for most of these
objects-- especially
the smaller ones where
the action of sunlight
is important in determining its
future motion because sunlight
will push on these
objects, right?
And it pushes on
the objects in ways
that are dependent on its
exact shape, and size,
and the color patterns on it.
And we don't know that detail
for most of these objects
very well.
And so at that limit, beyond
about 100 or 200 years,
the biggest uncertainty
in where those things are
going in the future
after that is
how sunlight's acting on them.
>>NOORY: Strange.
What an interesting science.
They say that the event
that wiped out the dinosaurs
65 million years ago might have
been a comet, not an asteroid.
>>DURDA: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Why do they keep
kicking that back and forth?
>>DURDA: Because we know
roughly the energy involved
with the impact.
We have the hole in the ground
in Mexico in the Yucatan.
But you can make a
hole in the ground
of this size in a couple
of different ways.
You can have a relatively
large object impacting
at a lower speed
or a smaller object
impacting at a higher
speed and get the same hole
in the ground.
All we have is the
hole in the ground now.
And so the uncertainty
comes from modeling
out the conditions
that will form
a crater of that
particular size.
And you can do that with
larger, slower-moving asteroids
or potentially a smaller,
but faster moving comet.
Comets will impact the Earth
typically at higher speeds
than the asteroids do.
Asteroids moving around
in the population near us
have orbits that are
kind of similar to ours.
And the crossing
speeds when they
hit us are a little bit lower.
Typical asteroids are going
to hit us at speeds of 40,000
or 50,000 miles an hour.
Comets come from the
outer solar system.
And so when they pass through
the inner solar system,
their crossing speed
is a lot higher.
It can be three or four
times higher than that.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>DURDA: And as
the speed goes up,
the energy goes up
exponentially with that.
So the uncertainty
comes from that.
There's one clue
we have as to what
actually hit us 65
million years ago.
There have been a number
of drill cores made
all around the world
to try to pierce
that portion, that
layer of debris--
>>NOORY: Of that time period?
>>DURDA: --from
that time period.
Well, there was
a drill core made
in the middle of
the Pacific Ocean.
And these drills
are not that big.
I mean, you're talking
about a little area of drill
going down into the
ocean, that big.
Well, would you
believe it or not?
By chance, the one
drill core happened
to pull up an actual fragment
of the asteroid itself
that was ejected out
in the crater that
came down in the debris layer.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>DURDA: We have a fragment, a
piece of the actual impactor.
It really does look sort of
like a weak, rocky asteroid.
But really, quite
frankly, we don't
have any big samples like
that of comets either.
And so it could be
a similar material.
A comet could be made of
something very similar.
>>NOORY: Was it
water at the time?
It is now where it hit.
>>DURDA: In the Yucatan?
Yes, it was at the time a
shallow sea, probably 300 feet
deep or so.
Now from the perspective
of that was a Mount Everest
size asteroid, right?
This was, you know,
ten kilometers.
>>NOORY: They must
have thrown water
up in the air and
everything, right?
>>DURDA: Oh, absolutely.
From the perspective of a Mount
Everest, 300 feet of water
is not that much.
It didn't even see the water
in terms of the impact itself,
but the water did react.
And all through
the Gulf of Mexico,
enormous tsunamis were created.
It made the event in Southeast
Asia in 2004 look like nothing.
>>NOORY: Dwarfed it.
>>DURDA: We know that happened
because we can see tsunami
deposits as far inland as
the Brazos River in Texas.
And we can see debris
in the Gulf Coast
in the sediments in the Gulf of
Mexico that came from inland.
The waves washed inland
and pulled debris
from hundreds of miles
inland back out to sea
and deposited them in
a very chaotic mess
of stuff, so nasty event.
>>NOORY: You wanted
to be an astronaut?
>>DURDA: Yeah, I still do.
Who all would like to
go to space, right?
I mean, what a great view.
Working for a lot of years, I
applied to the NASA astronaut
program for a lot of years.
And actually in 2004 made the
final cut, the final selection
to go to Houston and
interview for the job.
Missed it by that much
as Don Adams used to say.
But when you have 99
people to interview
and only 12 slots for the
job, those are the odds.
But I'm going anyway.
>>NOORY: Oh, you are?
Tell me about this.
>>DURDA: There's a revolution
in cheap, low cost,
very frequent access to space
that's happening out there.
Virgin Galactic, right,
Richard Branson's company.
XCOR Aerospace,
SpaceX, Blue Origin,
there are a number of
commercial companies
that are right now, as we
speak, test flying vehicles
to fly us in space, right,
all of us, everyday folks.
And I'm very fortunate
in my research position,
my job, my day job
to have a few tickets
on a couple of these
vehicles to actually
fly in space next year.
>>NOORY: Are you nervous?
>>DURDA: I'm realistic about it.
Yeah, this is dangerous.
There's no doubt about it.
>>NOORY: It is dangerous.
>>DURDA: These companies are
doing a really great job,
though, at trying to make
this as safe as practically
can be made safe, right?
Nothing in life is safe.
You took a risk driving
in the car here today.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>DURDA: But these companies
are doing a really good job
at being as safe as they can.
But in the end, you do
have to acknowledge.
You're doing the Wile E.
Coyote, strap a rocket
to your rear end, and being
launched out of the atmosphere,
right?
So there's no
getting around that.
But I wouldn't say nervous.
I am realistic about
what's going to happen.
But more than that, I am
looking forward to that view.
It's going to be amazing.
>>NOORY: How long
will you be up there?
>>DURDA: This is the
Alan Shepard special.
Most of these companies,
Virgin Galactic-- yeah.
These are the
suborbital flights.
You're launched out
of the atmosphere
typically at about mach
three sort of speeds, 3
and a half g's on the way up.
You're going to be
lofted out of the top
of the atmosphere
for about three
or four minutes over the top
of this nice ballistic arc--
>>NOORY: OK.
>>DURDA: 0 g, reenter the
atmosphere, six g's, mach
three and a half on
the way back down.
But you're going
to be high enough.
You're up at those altitudes,
oh, 135 kilometers up, 360,
000 feet.
You're going to see the
curvature of the Earth.
The sky will be pitch black.
>>NOORY: Oh, wow.
>>DURDA: You'll have that little
thin blue ribbon of atmosphere.
It's going to be spectacular.
>>NOORY: For one
moment, one split moment
you get as close to God
as you've ever been.
>>DURDA: Absolutely, absolutely.
And I mean, it's
astronaut wings time.
Formally by international
agreement, anything over 328,
000 feet is space.
So get your astronaut wings.
>>NOORY: And will the
craft come back intact,
or do you come back in a--
>>DURDA: Well, I hope so because
I'm going to be inside of it.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: So there's no
parachute capsule, huh?
>>DURDA: Well, there actually
are a lot of different designs.
The Virgin Galactic
vehicle, SpaceShipTwo,
is this really brilliant design,
this shuttlecock sort of design
where it's the carefree reentry.
Unlike the space
shuttle which had
to be very carefully
oriented for its reentry,
SpaceShipTwo can come
down in any orientation,
and it will self-right itself
to settle into the atmosphere.
Other companies have
different designs, though.
Some are winged vehicles.
Some are capsules.
But there's enough
of them out there
that we're all-- the price
will come down to the point
where-- I tell people save
for a very extravagant family
vacation to Europe, right?
By the time you've saved
to that level of money,
the ticket prices are going to
be at the prices where you--
>>NOORY: Because they're
pretty high right now?
>>DURDA: It's kind of like
when the first big flat screen
TVs came out, right?
You and I couldn't
afford them, but there
were people who could.
And those people who bought
them created the market
to have more of them made,
which may them cheaper.
And then now, you
know, you go to--
>>NOORY: Now they're disposable.
>>DURDA: Now they're
almost disposable.
And space flight is going
to get to that point too.
And what's going to be
remarkable about that
is it's not just going to be
the sort of military test pilot
sort of folks that
have traditionally
flown in space, right?
As wonderful and diverse as
that population of people is,
it's not the poets, the artists,
the radio and television hosts,
right?
When you get the
chance to fly in space,
it's going to
bring a perspective
to everybody else that's
going to be different
than we've had before.
And that's what's
going to be remarkable
about this democratization
of space flight.
>>NOORY: We've definitely
got to wire you up
on the day you go up there,
so we can either get you live
or on tape explaining
what it's like.
>>DURDA: There'd be a lot
of ooo's and ahh's I'm sure.
>>NOORY: Do you have
to train much for this?
>>DURDA: Well, yes and no.
If you're going as a tourist
to go and fly and have fun,
it's very minimal training.
I mean, really very minimal.
You'll want to have some
familiarization with what it's
going to feel like, maybe a spin
in a centrifuge might be good,
maybe a flight on the
zero gravity aircraft,
which is not that
expensive at all.
Might be good, but you don't
have to do those things.
I'm going to do a job.
I'm going there to
actually do research.
These vehicles are going to
be wonderful opportunities
for space scientists
to get out to the field
to do their research and their
work the same way botanists
and geologists go
out to the field now.
>>NOORY: What are
you going to do?
Can you tell us?
>>DURDA: Yeah, absolutely.
I'm going to be flying a--
I'm interested in asteroids,
obviously right?
So I'm going to be
taking advantage
of those very low gravity
conditions like the very
low gravity conditions on
most of these small asteroids
to study the rocks, the
soil, simulants of the rocks
and soil on the surface
of these things.
So I have work to do.
And so the training
is a little bit more.
I want to make sure that
I'm able to do that job.
So I've been flying jets,
and doing centrifuge runs,
and pressure suit runs in the
centrifuge, and zero gravity
flights.
I had a zero gravity flight
just three weeks ago.
So I'm spending time to be
ready so that when I'm flying
and that view out the window
and those sensations are not
the first time I've seen that,
or heard that, and felt that.
>>NOORY: How many people
will go up with you?
>>DURDA: Depends on the vehicle.
The Virgin Galactic vehicle
is a 8-person vehicle,
two Virgin Galactic
pilots in the front,
and six passengers in the back.
When I fly with XCOR
Aerospace, on the other hand,
in their Lynx
vehicle, it's just me
and the pilot
sitting in the front.
Yep.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>DURDA: In fact, the pilot
I'll be flying next to,
I've flown with in F18s in the
past, a former space shuttle
commander.
So I will get to fly
to space with him.
>>NOORY: That's exciting.
>>DURDA: Yeah.
>>NOORY: You know,
I've talked to a lot
of astronauts over the years.
And I don't think
they would ever
have traded that experience.
>>DURDA: No.
No, it's going to be unique.
I've done a lot of the
elements, but obviously I've
not yet had that view.
And I can't wait.
And I think what's going to be
magic about that is the ability
to come back and
share that with people
and encourage more folks
to get to go and do that.
And I think that's what's so
magic about this commercial
space flight, personalization of
space flight revolution that's
happening is that more and
more everyday folks are
going to get to go.
And when that
happens, I think it's
going to make space
that much more
relevant to a lot of people.
And we're going to have
that many more just amazing,
beautiful experiences
that are going
to be related from folks
with different backgrounds.
And we're going to think of
a lot of different things
to do in space we never
conceived of before
because of that.
>>NOORY: I wonder if it'll
change any perspective
that you have right now.
>>DURDA: I hope it does.
>>NOORY: I bet it will.
>>NOORY: When you
see the awe of that,
it's got to have
some effect on you.
>>DURDA: Absolutely.
You've talked to a
lot of astronauts.
I've talked a lot.
You see in their eyes the
way they talk about it.
That view from
space really changes
the way you think about
our planet that we live on,
ourselves, how we relate
to people, a lot of borders
disappear, a lot of
petty differences
disappear when you've
had that experience.
I think if more
people have that,
it'll only be a good thing.
>>NOORY: And are we doing
this as a group of nations,
or are all these nations
going to do it on their own?
>>DURDA: At the moment, it's
a group of commercial entities
based primarily
here in the States,
but it doesn't have
to be that way.
And already these
companies have agreements
with nations around the
planet, Saudi Arabia,
Kursow up in Sweden
to do flights.
And so that will be something
that could and should
have global reach.
I think that ultimately
is the hope and the goal.
>>NOORY: NASA says we're
not going back to the moon.
Other countries may,
private companies may.
I think that's probably
the way it's going to go.
>>DURDA: I hope that's
the way it goes.
I mean, NASA's role is to go
out there and really press
the frontier to get-- I
mean, commercial entities
want to have a return for
their investment, right?
And sometimes pushing--
>>NOORY: That's why
they're doing this, right?
>>DURDA: That's why
they're doing it.
But sometimes pushing
those bits of the frontier,
there's no immediate
commercial gain
to be made from
things like that.
There are obvious reasons
to go and do these things,
but that immediate
financial return
may not be there sometimes.
And that's the
proper role of NASA
and government agencies to
go and press those frontiers.
And that's what NASA does best.
What we should be then doing is
letting NASA do that part best
and not spending NASA's precious
funds on the more mundane
things that commercial companies
can go out there and do just
as well and perhaps
even better, and then
make more efficient
and more cheap.
And I think that
proper mix of the two
together is the way to do it.
>>NOORY: That's exciting.
>>DURDA: It's going to be fun.
What's fueling all of this?
Technology changing
faster and faster?
>>DURDA: Yeah, it's technology.
The press for the commercial
spaceflight really,
quite frankly, was
adventure tourism.
That was the cork loosening
from the bottle initially.
The technology came
from visionary people
like Burt Rutan and
Richard Branson who
just had the vision, who dared
to dream, to take the risk,
put their own personal
financial fortunes in investing
and things like that.
And that's what it takes
sometimes to crack that barrier
and make it all spill
forth, which we see.
There's a pent up
want to go to space
and to have that experience.
And the adventure tourism
motivation I think
was the primary origin of that.
And we're now at
the capability--
>>NOORY: What about
someone like Bob Bigalow
and his sending up pods?
And eventually isn't he going to
build a hotel up their sort of?
>>DURDA: Yeah, absolutely.
Maybe even coupling
with Dennis Tito
who wants to go to Mars, right,
The Inspiration Mars mission?
Inflatable capsules,
inflatable modules like this
are a pretty efficient way
to launch things, right?
And you could put bases
like that on the moon.
People think inflatable?
You're out in the
vacuum of space, right?
What if it pops like a balloon?
>>NOORY: I know it.
Scary.
>>DURDA: It doesn't
work that way actually.
These are very--
>>NOORY: They're thick.
>>DURDA: Well, they're thick.
But even if you
punch a hole-- you
can punch a hole in the space
station the size of a pencil.
The space station
has the ability
to pump and create
enough air to deal
with that for many,
many, many minutes
until you can go and pop a
piece of duct tape over the hole
and then stem that tide
until you can figure out
a more permanent repair.
It's not as disastrous
as the Hollywood movies
want to make it out to be.
I mean, you don't clearly want
to go around popping holes
in your spacecraft,
but it can be done.
And you can deal with it.
>>NOORY: Can you imagine what
room service would cost up
there?
>>DURDA: I don't know if you'll
get the 30 minutes or free like
some companies advertise, but--
>>NOORY: Exactly.
As you look into
space-- I mean, you're
a planetary
scientist-- you've got
to have thought about
extraterrestrial life.
>>DURDA: Yeah.
That's what got me in
this field to start with.
>>NOORY: That we cannot
be alone in the universe.
>>DURDA: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: What are
your thoughts on that?
>>DURDA: That's what got me in
the field in the first place.
It was a fascination
with this vision
that we live in a cosmos that's
filled to the brim with planets
of all variety, and the great
stage for the play of life
that those planets can offer.
Not speaking as a scientist,
just as a human being,
I think it just means we're in
a universe filled with life.
To paraphrase the movie
"Contact," if it is just us,
what an awful waste
of space, right?
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
It is.
And do you ever try to
answer that question?
What's it all about?
Why are we here?
>>DURDA: In a sense, that's what
the whole enterprise of science
is all about is just a
different approach to answering
those big questions,
exactly that question.
What's it all about?
Why are we here?
How did we get here?
Human beings ask those
questions and approach answers
to those questions in a
lot of different ways.
And science is just another
vehicle to get there.
And that's what we do every day.
And that's the fun of
the job is, in a sense,
never growing up,
right, because that's
what children do all the
time is ask those questions.
And, in a lot of
ways, scientists
are kids who just never grew
up and are lucky enough,
fortunate enough to get
to work at just asking
those questions all the
time, and thinking of tests,
and detective stories
of how to get in there
and answer those questions.
>>NOORY: It drives
us, doesn't it?
>>DURDA: It does.
It does.
And it's a great privilege
to be in a position
to do that as a job.
>>NOORY: Let's take some
more questions from you
for Dan Durda here
on Beyond Belief.
Who has got one for us?
Yes, sir?
>>AUDIENCE: All right.
So I'm curious-- you
mentioned how difficult it
is to spot some of
these smaller asteroids.
And visually, are we using more
radar technology to do that?
Where does radar
technology play in,
and is there room for
improvement there?
>>DURDA: Yeah,
absolutely, right.
There are a lot of
techniques and technologies
we can throw at that problem.
Traditionally, we've
done it optically.
We've looked with visible light
telescopes into the night sky.
You find little dots of light
moving in the sky that way.
There are other techniques
that are very efficient.
It turns out that one of
the most efficient ways
of detecting these things in
the near-Earth environment
is not visually,
but in the infrared.
I said before, these
are dark objects.
Dark objects in the
sunlight heat up.
And so in visible
wavelengths, they're
as dark as a piece of charcoal.
But if you go to the
infrared, they're
shining out there in space
against the cold depths
of space.
So if you launch an infrared
telescope like the one
I brought here-- you can pick
it up, George, off the base.
This is just a mounting base.
Go ahead and pick that up.
Yeah, there you go.
Hold it.
There you go.
>>DURDA: That's a
spacecraft we call Sentinel.
>>NOORY: How big would
this be in space?
>>DURDA: Same size, George.
>>NOORY: Oh, yeah, perfect.
>>DURDA: This is a smaller
model, obviously, of something
that's actually 25 feet tall.
>>NOORY: That's huge.
>>DURDA: Well, you
know, you standing next
to it would be about that big.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>DURDA: So this is the
Sentinel spacecraft.
It's an infrared
telescope that's
meant to be deployed into
an orbit inside the orbit
of the Earth, closer to
like the planet Venus.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>DURDA: And from that
perspective, looking back
to the Earth, all of those
dark, small, little objects
that we couldn't see
from here on the ground
all of a sudden show up
like little bright lights
in the infrared.
So the B612 Foundation is--
basically, we-- I say we--
I'm on the board of
the B612 Foundation.
We are trying to
basically put forward
the first privately-funded
space mission like this.
>>NOORY: That's exciting.
>>DURDA: NASA's got
a lot on their plate.
And we are trying to basically
help out by saying, look,
we're going to go at this
at the level of the sort
of philanthropic
way of raising funds
that a community might raise
to build a hospital, right?
Those same amount of funds we
could raise to literally help
protect the planet.
>>NOORY: That would be exciting.
>>DURDA: And as
a public venture,
you can contribute to helping
in almost literally saving
the planet.
So infrared is a
great way to go.
Radar techniques are
a great way to go,
not so much for
detecting the objects,
but for characterizing
them once we've found them.
What are they made out of?
How rough are there surfaces?
What are their shapes?
Are there boulders
on the surface?
Are there craters?
Is it a metal object
or a rocky object?
That's important to
know, as we've discussed.
So characterizing is
also very important.
And radar is great at that.
>>NOORY: Like new technology,
with our Beyond Belief cam,
we have our viewers from
all over this planet
checking in with us.
And they've got a
question for you, Dan.
>>AUDIENCE: Hi, Dan.
I'm Larissa from
Burbank, California.
I was wondering if it's possible
that the sun could get close
enough to the Earth
to burn us up?
>>DURDA: Oh, that's
a great question.
>>NOORY: Can we get
burned up by the sun?
>>DURDA: It's actually
going to happen.
Fortunately, not for
about another four
and a half billion years or so.
So not necessarily
in a literal sense
that the sun's going to
move position or the Earth.
But when the sun runs out of
its hydrogen fuel about four
and a half billion
years from now,
the central core
of the sun is going
to-- there won't no longer
be that thermal energy
source in the core to keep
the gravity from squeezing
that core down.
Gravity will take over again,
squeeze it even tighter
and hotter to the
point where helium
will start to fuse in
the core of the sun.
When that happens, the
outer envelopes of our sun
is going to expand
out almost certainly
passed the orbit of Venus,
maybe even out as far
as the orbit of Mars.
Our sun will become a red
giant star like many others
we see out there.
And in that sense,
I guess you could
say that the Earth will
get scorched and burned
from the sun that way.
>>NOORY: But in her
lifetime, she really
doesn't have anything
to worry about.
>>DURDA: Probably nothing to
worry about in our lifetimes.
Yeah, no, absolutely.
>>NOORY: Of course, you
remember the movie "Knowing"
with Nicolas Cage where
something happened
with the sun, and everything
was burned up on this planet?
>>DURDA: Right.
Right.
Yes.
>>NOORY: Is that conceivable?
Could we get hit by something,
some kind of plasma flare?
>>DURDA: Oh, that happens a lot.
And it's not so
much a direct threat
to biological life on the Earth.
It definitely can be a
threat to our technological
infrastructure.
The sun emits huge
explosions all the time,
these solar flares.
Magnetic fields on the sun
get wrapped up and pent up.
And when they snap, when
those magnetic lines of force
rearrange themselves
catastrophically,
the energy released
can be-- I don't even
know where to go in
terms of how many
megatons of energy that is.
It's more energy than the
Earth will ever generate.
And when the particles, the
plasma from those explosions
propagates through the solar
system, impacts the Earth,
affects our magnetic
field, those
charged particles can
enter the atmosphere.
They can fry our satellites.
They can actually
affect our power grid.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>DURDA: There have been major
power outages from flares.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>DURDA: So that is
a concern actually,
a real actual concern.
And as our civilization becomes
more dependent on our little
handheld electronic devices,
the GPS' that are navigating
our aircraft, that
can be a bad thing.
>>NOORY: We've got another
question for Dan Durda.
Yes, way in the back?
>>AUDIENCE: Uh, yes, I'm
curious if any fragments were
discovered from the most
recent event over Siberia,
and if we've been able to make
any new deductions about why
no fragments were found
from the Tunguska event?
>>DURDA: Yeah, actually
there have been.
That event dumped literally
hundreds of little black stones
into the snow.
>>NOORY: People are
selling this stuff.
>>DURDA: Oh, yeah.
Probably not long from now,
you'll be able to go on eBay
and buy pieces of it yourself.
So, yes, lots of
fragments were found.
It turns out to be a very common
type of rocky, stony meteorite
material, one of the most common
things that are out there.
We are going to be
looking at that in detail.
Every piece of meteorite
we get on the Earth
is a sample of some near-Earth
asteroid or some main belt
asteroid.
So they're precious
geologic clues for us
of how that material
was assembled.
Knowing that it's a relatively
weak rocky object and not
a stony iron or an
iron object tells
a lot about how these
objects break up
and why things like
the Tunguska object
probably didn't really leave
any big pieces on the ground.
We know that there's no
craters on the ground.
All that has really ever been
found from the Tunguska event
are little bits of
dust-sized particles embedded
in the sap in the trees
that it blew down.
>>NOORY: And millions of
trees were knocked down,
weren't they?
>>DURDA: I think the estimate is
something like 80 million trees
over 2, 000 square miles.
>>NOORY: --wiped out.
Did anybody die then?
>>DURDA: Not confirmed.
There are reports of at least
one person being blown off
their porch.
This is middle of--
>>NOORY: This was 190--
>>DURDA: 1908--
>>NOORY: --8.
>>DURDA: --in the
middle of Siberia.
So thankfully, very,
very low population.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>DURDA: So we don't think
there were any people killed,
fortunately, from that.
There were reports of a herd
of reindeer being scorched,
but no people, fortunately.
>>NOORY: What are the odds
of this other situation that
occurred again over Siberia--
>>DURDA: Yeah.
>>NOORY: --I mean, two
spots over Siberia?
Isn't that strange?
>>DURDA: Yeah.
That was a big question.
How come Russia's getting
all the big impacts?
But when you live in a country
that spans nine time zones,
that's a lot of fraction
of the area of the Earth
to catch stuff.
So you're just playing the odds
by having a very large country.
The Pacific Ocean,
by far, gets most
of the things that impact
the planet Earth, right,
just by definition
today at least.
>>NOORY: Would we get hit
and not know about it?
>>DURDA: Oh.
>>NOORY: I'm not
saying about seeing it.
Would the impact occur,
let's say in the ocean,
and we simply just
don't know about it?
>>DURDA: Oh, yeah.
Sure, certainly in the past.
Today we have the same
network of sensors
that allowed us to learn so
much about this particular event
in Russia just a
few months back.
So this is the global network
of infrasound detectors.
There are, of course,
military satellites orbiting
the Earth, which are scanning
the edge of the Earth's
atmosphere all the time looking
for interesting infrared
explosive events, right?
They have their other reasons
for looking for those things,
but they certainly
show asteroids as well.
So it's hard for
something of that scale
to go undetected these days.
But certainly the smaller ones,
this desk, or a basketball, it
happens all the time.
Things enter all over the place
without us knowing about it.
>>NOORY: Daniel,
paint us a scenario.
An object five miles
wide heading this way,
and we've got a month's notice.
>>DURDA: Oh, that's
a bad scenario.
>>NOORY: Paint that
picture for us.
What happens?
If it impacts, what happens?
Just lay it out for us.
>>DURDA: Well, first of
all, that's the proverbial,
you know, bend over and
kiss it goodbye moment
because if something of that
size several decades out,
there's maybe some--
>>NOORY: Planning.
There's planning.
>>DURDA: --maybe you
can do something.
A month out,
absolutely nothing you
could do about it at that stage.
It's going to be like the
movie "Deep Impact," which
was a human story
about what people
did to prepare for the end.
>>NOORY: --during
their last moments.
>>DURDA: Yeah.
Do you spend time
with your family?
Do you go--whatever.
It's going to be that kind of--
>>NOORY: Is it a planet killer?
>>DURDA: Five miles
across is very nearly
the size of the object that
wiped out the dinosaurs, right?
That's a civilization
ender, for sure.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>DURDA: It's
maybe just possibly
even a species ender
for us at that point.
>>NOORY: Would there
be any survivors?
I mean, could you
go underground?
Could you hide?
>>DURDA: The problem
with an impact
like that is you can escape the
initial ravages of the impact,
the blast, perhaps scorching
wildfires depending
on the scale of the impact,
but you can't escape
the poisoning of the atmosphere,
the heating of the atmosphere.
It's going to be long-term
global warming after that,
right, because you're going
to put enough carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere to be bad.
In the short-term, it's
going to be cooling effects.
You're going to put aerosols in
the atmosphere and dust, which
is going to be the
nuclear winter scenario.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>DURDA: So even if
you hide in a cave,
and you've got a week's
worth of food, that's--
>>NOORY: That's not
going to help you.
OK.
>>DURDA: Not to mention the
fact that the ozone-- we've
talked about the
ozone layer before.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>DURDA: An object
of that size is
going to have enough stuff
in it to destroy the ozone
layer many, many, many
thousands of times over.
>>NOORY: And then you
instantly get that effect too.
>>DURDA: And then
you've got all the UV.
It's just going to
kill plants, and algae,
and break down the food chain.
There's no place to go--
>>NOORY: So if you and
I were on the planet,
and we're talking together.
Not that you'd want to you
end your moment with me,
but we're there.
Do we see something coming in?
What do we see?
>>DURDA: Yeah.
So an object of that size
coming in for-- that's
big enough that for
the weeks before,
you're going to actually
see it in the sky as a star.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>DURDA: In the few
days before, it's
going to be a pretty
brilliant star in the sky
as it approaches you.
In those moments
as it's entering
through the atmosphere, its
many, many, many, many suns
in the sky, bright
enough, hot enough
that it will spontaneously
ignite any vegetation
within eye shot of
it over the horizon.
And then the big boom.
And then it's all over.
>>NOORY: Will government tell
us about it if it's that close?
>>DURDA: Yeah.
That's-- well--
>>NOORY: Can you
imagine the chaos
over the course of a month?
>>DURDA: Certainly
I think we all
have the impression that
governments wanting to control
information the way they
do, there will certainly
be people who will want
to control at least how
and what information is put out.
But I'll tell you,
with something
of that scale with the global
network of amateur citizen
scientists around the planet,
can't hide something like that.
It's just, there's no hiding it.
>>NOORY: And would
you go-- would you
go on the radio
station show with me?
>>DURDA: Yeah, my--
>>NOORY: Coast to Coast, would
you tell me the way it is?
>>DURDA: I think
most of my colleagues
that I work with, our philosophy
is-- we're scientists, right?
We deal with information.
Our predilection is to
give as much information
to people as possible so you
have information to work with.
More information is always
better from that perspective,
from my perspective.
Certainly I know there
are people out there who
would like to not do
that, but everybody
I know in my community and
the asteroid impact hazard
community is all about
sharing that information.
>>NOORY: You and I
have talked about this
for in excess of 12 years
about the possibilities
of these things happening.
>>DURDA: And then
we had Chelyabinsk,
which was what we've
been talking about.
>>NOORY: We'd been
talking about it.
It was right there.
So is there that
possibility that one day we
could have a, if not a
planet killer, a city killer?
>>DURDA: Yeah, certainly
the city killers.
Fortunately, as I said,
the telescopic surveys
have done a great job
at the big civilization
enders, the dinosaur killers.
Now there's always
the possibility
that a comet nucleus from
the outer solar system
can drift through.
Several years ago, we had Comet
Hale-Bopp if you'll remember.
>>NOORY: Yeah but, how much
time do we have on that?
>>DURDA: That's the
danger of comets
is they can come from the
outer solar system with only
a year or two of notice.
>>NOORY: You're kidding?
>>DURDA: And because of
the orbits that they're on,
there's nothing you
can do about those.
I mean, really nothing
you can do about those.
>>NOORY: And how big is a comet?
>>DURDA: Comet Hale-Bopp
was 50 kilometers across.
Not 5, 50.
>>NOORY: That's huge.
Oh, that's huge.
That's like a
little tiny planet.
>>DURDA: That would
take us back to bacteria
on the planet,
something of that scale.
>>NOORY: Would that literally
shatter the planet if it hit?
>>DURDA: No.
Even the moon-forming
impact, which was something,
we think, nearly
the size of Mars
hitting the proto-Earth on
a glancing, shearing angle.
It certainly was
enough to splash off
most of the mantle of the
Earth and part of that object.
But big objects have
so much gravity,
it's really hard to kind of
really disperse them like that.
So certainly that
sort of comet impact,
the Earth as a physical
entity, is going to be fine.
Biologically, it's not a
good day for the planet,
but as a physical
entity, no problem.
But those, I have to
say, are extremely--
comets are only a tiny--they're
like 1% of the impact hazard we
worry about.
The real concern now
that we've completed
the survey for the big
near-Earth asteroids,
and given the fact that comets
are such a tiny fraction,
the real concern are
exactly what you said,
the city killers, right?
And those are what we want
to look for with Sentinel.
Those are what we want to go
out with other spacecraft,
and characterize,
and learn more about.
And those are the objects
that we're still discovering.
We have not yet discovered
most of those objects that
are in the near-Earth
population.
>>NOORY: Mile-long asteroid hits
in the middle of the Atlantic,
how big is the tsunami on the
eastern coast of the United
States.
>>DURDA: Mile-wide impact,
those are big tsunamis.
Those are many, many
10s, probably a couple
hundred meters high.
It washes across--
>>NOORY: It would knock down
every building as it hits.
>>DURDA: Yeah.
You go along the entire Atl--
basically that tsunami will
propagate around the world, but
certainly the Atlantic basin
will--
>>NOORY: And how
far in do you think?
50 miles?
100 miles?
>>DURDA: It depends on
the coastline, right?
Certain coasts, you'll wash
a lot further in than others,
but yes, you're talking many,
many, dozens of miles inland.
>>NOORY: Devastating
the whole area?
>>DURDA: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Done?
>>DURDA: Well, we saw what
happened in Southeast Asia
with only a-- that
was meters tall.
We're talking 10 kilometers.
>>NOORY: And that
was an earthquake.
>>DURDA: That was
an earthquake that
dropped a little
block in the ocean.
The tsunami profile
you get from an impact
is a little different than
those earthquake ones.
And so we used to worry about
those for smaller impactors.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>DURDA: We learned, though,
by studying that process
that the splash
that you get creates
a slightly different wave form.
So the football-field-sized
impactors in the ocean,
we used to worry about
the tsunamis from those,
but now we know that
most of that gets
sucked up on the coastline,
the outer continental shelf.
The big ones, though,
a mile impactor, that's
going to go in anyway.
That's bad.
>>NOORY: Are you still glad
you're doing what you're doing?
>>DURDA: Absolutely, absolutely.
You know, it's not just the
hazards from the asteroids.
These same objects that
are potential impactors
because they are so
close to the Earth,
and because it's
so easy for them
to impact, that also can
conversely mean those
are the objects that are easier
for us to get to as well.
And they hold great
promise for exploration
for, as we discussed,
providing us that place
to go to expand the human
experience in space,
the human presence in our
solar system beyond the Earth,
Moon system.
Before we go to
Mars, it would be
great to practice
those techniques
on another deep
space object that's
further away than the Moon.
And those asteroids are
great targets for that.
>>NOORY: They say a
comet could hit Mars--
>>DURDA: Oh, yes.
Yes.
>>NOORY: --sometime next year.
Is that a real possibility?
>>DURDA: Comet Siding Spring.
It's still a possibility.
It comes down to
this uncertainty
that we talked about before.
And in the case of a comet, it's
not the sunlight pushing on it.
It's the sunlight activating
all those gaseous jets
on the comet.
>>NOORY: Better Mars than us.
>>DURDA: Better Mars than us.
In some ways, it would
be a fantastic scientific
experiment--
>>NOORY: --to watch.
>>DURDA: --to watch
an impact like that.
It would be bad for our
Mars program, space program,
though, because all of the
space assets we currently
have at Mars would be in
severe danger from that.
>>NOORY: They're all gone.
And what about the debris
from the impact for us?
Could it hit us?
>>DURDA: That would provide--
well, you know, it's
impacts like that
that that do deliver
Mars meteorites to Earth.
That would be a longer
time scale thing.
I don't think that
we would necessarily
see, in the following
year or two,
a shower of Mars meteorites.
But that would certainly
be a new recent impact
that, over sort of short
term geologic time scales,
would certainly deliver
stuff to us, no doubt.
>>NOORY: Wouldn't
that be amazing just
to be able to watch that happen?
>>DURDA: Every year two
tons of Mars meteorites
falls on our planet, right?
We don't know where they are.
They're all falling
in the Atlantic.
>>NOORY: And from how long ago?
>>DURDA: From--
>>NOORY: --millions
of years ago?
>>DURDA: On--
>>NOORY: Billions?
>>DURDA: --on time
scales of millions
to hundreds of
thousands of years.
>>NOORY: OK.
They've just been
orbiting around,
and then they get sucked in?
>>DURDA: Exactly.
They are just that
many more little bits
of near-Earth material.
But it would be certainly
fascinating to actually watch
an impact of that scale.
We've never seen something
on a hard surface
of an object of that scale.
We can't reproduce
those in the laboratory.
And we don't yet know
enough about the physics
to model it in a computer.
We know a lot of the physics,
but an impact like that
would certainly help
really nail down
and constrain
those models better
to allow us to make
better predictions even
for the impacts here on Earth.
>>NOORY: Will we get better
in the next 5 or 10 years
for asteroid sighting?
>>DURDA: Absolutely.
If Sentinel launches,
we're currently
targeting 2017 to 2018.
This infrared mission alone in
the first month of operation
would discover 20,000
new asteroids--
>>NOORY: --that we
don't know about?
>>DURDA: That we
don't know about.
>>NOORY: We've got to do it.
>>DURDA: Over its lifetime, over
six and a half years orbiting
around inside the
orbit of the Earth,
it would find 500,000
new asteroids--
>>NOORY: In what size?
>>DURDA: Down to the things
that are of this concern, down
to about maybe a third the
size of a football field.
That's why we want to
launch this mission.
This mission will
literally completely
clean up the problem for us in
terms of knowing and predicting
when these small objects are--
>>NOORY: Is there any
reason we won't launch this?
>>DURDA: We just need to
build up the funding for it.
We are privately raising
the money for this mission.
And that's the only
thing stopping us.
>>NOORY: Privately?
>>DURDA: Privately.
>>NOORY: Why isn't government
spending the money?
>>DURDA: They have
other things to do.
>>NOORY: You would think it
would be a great investment.
>>DURDA: Well, but there are
lots of other great investment
that NASA has to.
So I don't want to,
in any way, appear
to be pointing a finger
at NASA saying you
guys should be doing
this because there's
a lot of other things that
they need to be doing as well.
And so we view ourselves
as sort of just helping out
with the problem, taking on a
bit of this problem ourselves,
and letting NASA go on and
do other things that it
can do really well too.
>>NOORY: Daniel Durda,
always a pleasure, my friend.
>>DURDA: Thanks a lot,
George, a lot of fun.
>>NOORY: Daniel Durda,
here on Beyond Belief.
[APPLAUSE]
>>NOORY: Thank you.
Well, look, he's given us
some great information.
I have a simple theory.
Live every day like
it's your last.
Thanks for watching
Beyond Belief.
[APPLAUSE]
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]